TOM: We have filmed a lot of B-roll in Pripyat
And we can not all use that.
We think we will get a lot of questions about how we got into the zone,
so we are going to show a lot of cool images
of what have done, and then
we answer some of the questions that are coming.
How do you get here?
PAUL: coming here is actually very simple
It's not difficult. There is no
drama. It is as simple as
organizing an excursion on a normal holiday.
About. There are some
technical details you need to arrange,
all paperwork must be signed off
but, a company does that for you.
There are many different levels,
we have gone for a private tour,
you can also join a bus full of people.
TOM: I'm sure there is - that a level is even deeper than what we do now.
I mean, we're not in a bad hotel here,
Given we are in the middle-- We are actually in the forbidden zone.
Yes, I have a shower, I have a bed, I have one
screen door that stops insects,
PAUL: Wi-fi internet?
TOM: Yes, that's a point!
We can upload this from here we want.
We got 5 meg, 1 Mb up.
And again, we are in the forbidden zone, here.
What kind of permission do you need?
PAUL: Permission is not being dealt with by us - we are not worried about the wizards.
This is done by the travel organization and that is relatively standard paperwork
TOM: Yes, the answer is that you pay the travel company the right amount of money
Um, we do not really want to recommend a travel company
Uh, because in case we have broken rules somewhere - we want to put the tour company in trouble
and also because it is a few months later by the time you see this.
The company can then be in different hands. So do research, look at reviews, make a recommendation from a friend if you can.
But in the end permission comes from them
What do you get access to?
TOM: We saw a lot of abandoned buildings in Pripyat
uh, of course that's kind of ...
PAUL: Many of them are starting to merge into each other and ...
You can go to so many rooms with a few cabinets, some devices that have been stripped of all their copper
that you can see before it becomes monotonous
TOM: But you also have things like the culture palace, the culture palace
PAUL: That was special
TOM: That was the moment where I ...
I walked out of there and into the main square in Pripyat
and there is a hotel that has been abandoned, it is overgrown, trees are coming through the concrete.
and that was the moment I thought ...
This used to be a city with 40,000 people in it
This ... this used to be lively and this is what happens when you leave it for a while
That was that moment of, oh, ok
PAUL: The scale is also immediately clear. I mean...
40,000 people is kind of ...
it's a nice number, but that does not mean much until you recognize the scale compared to a city in the UK
TOM: Yes, or wherever you live
PAUL: And this was a young city, this was a professional city, the average age here was about 26. That's where I am and-- Tom is timeless
And they were people like us, they were, I mean, I'm not a physicist, but I have a reasonable understanding of science
and that was kind of the level of the people who worked on maintenance here
they had to be reasonably qualified to come into the city
It was a beautiful one, for that time. It was a model city
And because of that, there is a lot of footage of the city in operation
you can go back and watch the heyday
and when you place yourself there, in its current state of decline
that gives a lot of realization
TOM: Yes, yes. It is bleak
Uh, I mean there is always the question if you do something like this, because it is essentially disaster tourism
It's been 30 years ...
It has already been pillaged, destroyed, looted
Nothing is intact
Something of value that could be taken away is gone
All that sentimental value is taken either by the original owner
or has recently been destroyed
You do not walk on consecrated ground
But as it is not a nice 'let's go do things' vacation
PAUL: Yes. You expect to go up with a smile and thumbs and, yes, there is in the more ...
TOM: Yes, I have very inappropriate ...
I took a selfie ...
You will see the Chernobyl reactor
you are about 100 meters away, on the spot where tourists may come
you are 100 meters away from the reactor that exploded
And, ok ...
it is ... I ...
And I just laughed instinctively at the camera
That ... that felt wrong
PAUL: It feels a bit wrong, but we are tourists, we are on vacation of sorts
and at the same time all Geiger counters go off.
they can not be muted, so we all squeak loudly and are grinning a bit cheesy
that seems a bit inappropriate, but ...
TOM: We passed the red forest
PAUL: Oh yes
TOM: We had to go through that speed, because even in a vehicle on speed your Geiger counter goes off.
because the forest is remote from the nuclear power plant
so it has absorbed radioactivity and it is now, again giving off
PAUL: Yes, for whatever reason they have not cleaned it.
Maybe it just was not useful for continued activities, but uh ...
TOM: because they have gone through, that's the important thing,
The city was not immediately abandoned
The other reactors experience another decade or so.
PAUL: Yes, in the mid-90s if I remember correctly
TOM: It's an interesting place. There is a lot to see, although much of it is not more than "here is another abandoned building"
If that is your thing, this would be great
Can you break into it?
PAUL: Technically, yes, but ...
TOM: No.
PAUL: Most of what you will see online is exaggerated
because it is a good story
and I do not intend to deny that, it is a good story
if someone claims that they have broken into the zone
woah, brilliant!
And they will give the photos, they will have a brilliant story
But then they start giving obvious information and then know they were on a tour
because there are certain things that you need to be pointed out
there would be no way you would find certain details within the zone unless you had a guide
TOM: Yes, and you are obliged to have a zone guide
For example, there is no other way to get past all checkpoints.
you have to pass through a few radioactive forests
PAUL: And for Pripyat center should go through 3?
TOM: You should go through three different checkpoints
or avoid it
You should avoid the patrolling police
And you should find the way
Yes, it is theoretically possible
In practice, no, I do not think many people have actually broken into
Is it dangerous?
TOM: If you follow your guide, if you do not do stupid things, no it is not particularly dangerous
You do not go to a high radiation area
You get a Geiger counter in case
There is really not much that is dangerous there
That said, the rules about what you can and can not do seem to change regularly
And are not always followed by different guides and different groups
PAUL: Yes, so this trip, for example, the official guidelines of mid-2012 was 'you can not enter the buildings'
TOM: Everyone was in the buildings
PAUL: Everyone was in buildings. It is the most interesting
Of course you enter the buildings
We climbed to the top of one
TOM: Yes, indeed. 16 floors up
And, again, not dangerous
Guides knew it. We went up
PAUL: Do not get me wrong. The advice of health and safety is here "do not hurt yourself"
The roof did not have a good railing
There were a few railings at your height to make sure you did not fall, but
you could, if you wanted to be stupid, you could hurt yourself
The elevator shafts in that 16-storey building were open
TOM: They were open and there was a cord on the other side, in front of one
PAUL: Yes, just in case ...
TOM: In case you wanted to, yes ...
PAUL: Perfect
TOM: Do not drink tap water
I can not say that you will get diarrhea somewhere where there are no toilets
In a [laughs] in a nuclear zone accident
But I would not mess it if I were you
Bottled water is cheap
Everything is cheap here. How much was the beer here?
PAUL: I just enjoyed 2 pints for £ 1
TOM: Yes, um. Cigarettes, if someone out there is a smoker, about 20 or 30P is a suit
It is amazingly cheap here
How long that will remain is another matter
Is it ghostly?
TOM: I was planning to say no
PAUL: I'm going with yes
TOM: What is your reasoning?
PAUL: There is now and then, and it happened in the tower that we climbed
We turned a corner ...
A dark corridor ...
A few mailboxes, a kind of pigeon hole with colors ...
A gust of wind came along and that all creaked at once
And I thought I saw something at the end of the corridor
Kind of, a bit of a horror movie situation
TOM: Ok, maybe I was not in a situation where that happened
PAUL: Seconds later, absolutely fine
TOM: Cause, I do not know. Middle of winter, dead of the night
When it gets cold and inclement and dark and rainy
Yes, then I understand. But we were here in the middle of summer
It is a very strange place, but I would not say it is creepy.
PAUL: No, there is certainly gravity
which we have alluded to
TOM: You will have noticed that parts are being added extra
There have been a lot of photographers and some of them are not so ...
Do not be so careful with things untouched
PAUL: No, there is not a single original recording that we can make here and we are not going to claim that they are there.
I mean, we're going to try it. We got a drone, that's cool, but even that is done
TOM: Cat!
Cat! Cat!
There is a cat
TOM: Really ...
PAUL: The worried cat is back
TOM: Real Chernobyl cat. Hello cat!
Say hello to people
[meow]